
handout 2 - algerba
Natural join This is the process which combines two tables into one, along the common attributes. Suppose we
have two tables T1 and T2. We denote their natural join as:
T1 ./ T2 :
(We pronounce the symbol ./ as just “join”.) The resulting table will have columns for each attribute of T1
and each attribute of T2. Attributes which are common to both are mentioned only once in T1 ./ T2. The
rows of the resulting table are composed of a row of T1 together with a row of T2, provided that they have
the same value in all common attributes.
Basic SQL does not have a natural join operation but the operation can be simulated by listing T1 and T2
in the “FROM” part, and by including the conditions “T_1.x=T_2.x” for every common attribute x in the
“WHERE” part.1
Other operators It is easy to add to this collection the usual set-theoretic operators [ (meaning “union”), \
(meaning “intersection”), and 􀀀 (meaning “set difference”). They are only applicable if the tables involved
share the same set of attributes. In order to describe the process of aggregation one needs yet further operators.
Although these are being used to represent queries inside a database management system, we will not
pursue this topic further.
If you are interested in how PostgreSQL executes a query, then precede it with the keyword “EXPLAIN”.
Instead of actually running the query, PostgreSQL will output a verbose form of the corresponding relational
algebra expression.

handout5-funtional
81. Playing with functional dependencies. Once some functional dependencies have been postulated, others can
be inferred to hold as well. Here are some rules for this:
2
Trivial dependencies If the attribute X is actually a member of the collection U, then the functional dependency
U → X is definitely and boringly true, as you can see from the definition.
Augmentation If the dependency U → X has already been postulated, and if V is a bigger collection of attributes
than U, then V → X must also be true.
Transitivity If we already know that U → X holds for every X that is mentioned in the collection V , and if we
further know that V → Y is true, then U → Y must also hold. Again, this follows easily from the definition.
These three rules are known as Armstrong’s Axioms, and it can be shown that no further rule is needed to derive
all functional dependencies that hold as a consequence of postulating some. One says that Armstrong’s Axioms
are sound and complete.
Conversely, if we are charged with stating all functional dependencies which should hold for a given relational
schema, then it is sufficient to list a basis for them, that is, a collection of dependencies from which all others
follow by Armstrong’s Axioms.
Notation issues: Note that when we write a functional dependency U → X, U is a collection of attributes whereas
X is a single attribute, e.g., cid,year → numbers. So, the notation is asymmetric. We can extend the notation
so that we have collections of attributes on both the sides of→. We define U → V to mean that U → X holds for
every X in V . Using this notation, we can see the transitivity rule in the more conventional form: if U → V and
V → Y then U → Y .
82. A closure operation for functional dependencies. Although Armstrong’s Axioms are a complete method
for finding additional dependencies, the derivation process itself is computationally expensive: in the worst case it
runs in exponential time. For the following special case there is a simpler method.
Suppose we are given a family F of functional dependencies, and we ask whether a particular functional dependency
U → X is a logical consequence of the given ones. To answer this question, we successively augment the
set of attributes U with further attributes which functionally depend on (a subset of) U. So for each functional
dependency (V → Y ) ∈ F we check whether V is a subset of U. If this is the case, then the attribute Y can be
added to U, and the rule V → Y can be deleted from F (because it has made its contribution and will not be
needed again). The process is repeated until no further rule remains in F whose left hand side is a subset of the
current U. The new U contains all attributes which depend functionally on the original U. If X is among them,
then U → X is true, otherwise it is false.
Here is an example. Suppose we are given F = {AB → C,CB → D,A → B} and ask whether A → D follows
from this. The completion process proceeds as follows:
U F
start state {A} {AB → C,CB → D,A → B}
{A,B} {AB → C,CB → D}
{A,B,C} {CB → D}
final state {A,B,C,D} {}
We find that all four attributes depend on A, and in particular, A → D is a logical consequence of the given
dependencies.
